hi everyone Dr Mark eatonson here
specialist in the treatment of
pathological narcissism and related
issues this is just a quick video to
clear up some confusion out there with
respect to terminology I see a lot of
people misusing the term overt and
covert when it comes to narcissism and
NPD people tend to use the word covert
to describe vulnerable narcissistic
presentations and they tend to use the
word overt to describe grandiose
presentations but these terms actually
don't mean the same thing
all narcissistic individuals have both
overt and covert traits overt simply
means that it's readily apparent and
observable it's on the surface obvious
to everyone covert means that it's under
the surface it's hidden it's implicit
maybe unconscious it's not obvious to
everyone maybe not even the person
themselves
also all narcissistic individuals have
both vulnerable and grandiose traits I
made this grid to help clarify the issue
here we have the x-axis representing the
Continuum of vulnerable to grandiose
presentations and the y-axis represents
the Continuum of overt to covert
presentations and as you can see an
individual can be both overt and
vulnerable or they can be both covert
and grandiose
and typically they are inversely
proportional that means that overt
vulnerability is driven by covert
grandiosity and vice versa so I'll give
you an example to help explain let's say
that an individual with NPD is depressed
because they feel they sort of didn't
perform well enough at a party the night
before they've maybe they feel that
nobody likes them they didn't make a
positive enough impression they were
essentially ignored
and this is a common feeling amongst
narcissistic individuals by the way uh
they present in an overt manner with
distress and upset they're feeling
depression and anxiety they're
experiencing some degree of
fragmentation and overwhelm these are
the obvious symptoms they're the ones
that they're talking about
in this case the narcissistic
presentation is overtly vulnerable
meaning that their vulnerable symptoms
are obvious and apparent
but what's actually driving the
breakdown
the answer is covert grandiosity the
individual expects that they should be
the center of attention at the party
they have unconscious entitled
expectations about how other people
should react to them and make them feel
underlying perfectionism vanity and
grandiosity is fueling the feeling that
nobody likes them because not enough
people made them feel special wanted
seen or admired so we would locate this
person here on the chart
because they're displaying overt
vulnerability but remember
the overt vulnerability is driven by
covert grandiosity they're inversely
proportional
now what about somebody who's presenting
with overt or obvious grandiosity
the associated covert vulnerability
becomes apparent when we remember that
overt grandiosity like arrogance
devaluation and entitlement is actually
defensive
the narcissistic individual adopts these
postures in order to compensate for
underlying feelings of emptiness
worthlessness and shame
remember the covert features are always
driving the overt features
covert grandiosity drives overt
vulnerability
covert vulnerability drives over
grandiosity
always look for the side of the equation
that isn't being directly expressed
okay so that's it for today hopefully
this will be helpful in clearing up some
of the confusion out there about
terminology feel free to give this video
a like if you found it helpful until
next time take good care